---
title: >-
    planetMagFields: A Python package for analyzing and plotting planetary magnetic field data
authors:
  - name: Ankit Barik
    email: ankit.barik@gmail.com
    affiliation: [1]
    orcid: 0000-0001-5747-669X
    corresponding: true
  - name: Regupathi Angappan
    email: rangapp1@jhu.edu
    affiliation: [1]
    orcid: 0000-0002-6258-0659
affiliations:
  - index: 1
    name: Johns Hopkins University
date: 2024-02-14
bibliography: paper.bib
tags:
  - Python
  - planetary science
  - magnetic fields
  - visualization
---

# Summary
Long term observations and space missions have generated a wealth of data on the magnetic fields of the Earth and other solar system planets [@IGRF13;@Connerney1987;@Connerney1991;@Kivelson2002;@Anderson2012;@Cao2020;@Connerney2022]. `planetMagfields` is a Python package designed to have all the planetary magnetic field data currently available in one place and to provide an easy interface to access the data. `planetMagfields` focuses on planetary bodies that generate their own magnetic field, namely Mercury, Earth, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune and Ganymede. `planetMagfields` provides functions to compute as well as plot the magnetic field on the planetary surface or at a distance above or under the surface. It also provides functions to filter out the field to large or small scales as well as to produce `.vts` files to visualize the field in 3D using Paraview [@Ahrens2005;@Ayachit2015], VisIt [@visit] or similar rendering software. Lastly, the `planetMagfields` repository also provides a Jupyter notebook for easy interactive visualizations.

# Statement of need
Planetary scientists studying the magnetic field of planets need to constantly access, visualize and analyze magnetic field data.  In addition, with technological advancements in space exploration and planetary missions, we are constantly getting new data for planetary magnetic fields and hence, better field models. Though reviews of these field models are often written [@Schubert2011;@Stanley2014], there is very little software available that provides easy access to these models with a high level language and a way to easily visualize and analyze them. There is some software dedicated to specific planets such as Jupiter [@Wilson2023] and Saturn [@Khurana2020]. But as of this day a software, that has different magnetic field models for all different planets of the solar system in one place, is not available. `planetMagfields` is intended not only to currently fill this gap, but also to provide a central repository, to be constantly updated, as more magnetic field models become available.


# Mathematics

Magnetic fields in planets are generated by electric currents in a fluid region inside them through a process called dynamo action [@Jones2011;@Schubert2011;@Stanley2014]. Outside this region, in the absence of current sources, the magnetic field $\vec{B}$ can be written as the gradient of a scalar potential $V$. The potential $V$ is usually written as an expansion in orthogonal functions in spherical coordinates,

\begin{equation}
  V = R_p \sum_{l,m} \left(\dfrac{R_p}{r}\right)^{l+1} [g_l^m \cos(m\phi) + h_l^m \sin(m\phi)] P_l^m (\cos\theta)\, ,
  \label{eq:gaussCoeff}
\end{equation}

where, $g_l^m$ and $h_l^m$ are called the Gauss coefficients. Here, $(r,\theta,\phi)$ are spherical coordinates representing radial distance from the center of a planet, co-latitude and longitude, respectively. $R_p$ represents the radius of the planet and $P_l^m$ are associated Legendre functions of order $l$ and degree $m$, where $l$ and $m$ are integers. Thus, the radial magnetic field is easily obtained using

\begin{equation}
  B_r(r,\theta,\phi) = -\dfrac{\partial V}{\partial r} = \sum_{l,m} (l+1) \left(\dfrac{R_p}{r}\right)^{l+2} [g_l^m \cos(m\phi) + h_l^m \sin(m\phi)] P_l^m (\cos\theta)\, .
  \label{eq:Br}
\end{equation}

This is the most commonly visualized component of the magnetic field of a planet, since it readily provides a representation of the field geometry (e.g: dipole vs quadrupole). Equation \eqref{eq:gaussCoeff} provides a way to extrapolate the field to any desired altitude with respect to the planetary surface, both above and below, as long as the region is outside the field generating region.


The Gauss coefficients represent the multipole modes of a planet's magnetic field. For example, $g_1^0$ represents the axial dipole (along the rotation axis) while $g_1^1$ and $h_1^1$ represent orthogonal components of the equatorial dipole. Thus, the dipole tilt of a planet, or the angle between the dipole and the rotation axis is given by:

$$\theta_{dip} = \tan^{-1}\dfrac{\sqrt{\left(g_1^1\right)^2 + \left(h_1^1\right)^2}}{g_1^0}$$

while the longitude of the dipole is given by:

$$\phi_{dip} = \tan^{-1}h_1^1/g_1^1$$

The raw data obtained from satellites or space missions are usually inverted to obtain these Gauss coefficients. These coefficients are the key to describing the surface magnetic field of a planet as well as how that magnetic field looks like at a certain altitude from the surface. The magnetic energy content on the surface in a certain degree $l$ is given by the Lowes spectrum:

$$R_{l} = (l + 1) \sum_{m}\left( \left(g_l^m\right)^2 + \left(h_l^m\right)^2\right),$$

$l$ plays the role of a wavenumber. Low degrees represent large spatial features in the field while high degrees represent small scale features. The maximum available degree $l_{max}$ of data for a particular planet depends on the quality of observations. For example, for Earth $l_{max} = 13$ because beyond that the magnetic field of magnetized rocks on the crust obscures any signal coming from the self generated field. Similarly, Jupiter's field was known only well constrained till $l_{max} = 4$ [@Connerney1998] before the Juno mission provided excellent observations of finer scale structure to extend the well constrained $l_{max}$ to 18 [@Connerney2022].

# Description of the software

## The software package

`planetMagfields` has data files containing Gauss coefficients from various inversion studies of planetary magnetic models for different planets. These coefficients are then used to obtain the magnetic field on a grid of latitude and longitude.

### Magnetic field models used

`planetMagfields` currently supports the following magnetic field models:

 - *Mercury*  : @Anderson2012 , @Thebault2018, @Wardinski2019
 - *Earth*    : The International Geomagnetic Reference Field (IGRF) [@IGRF13]
 - *Jupiter*  : The VIP-4 model [@Connerney1998], JRM09 [@Connerney2018], JRM33 [@Connerney2022]
 - *Saturn*   : Cassini SOI [@Burton2009], Cassini11 [@Dougherty2018], Cassini11+ [@Cao2020]
 - *Uranus*   : @Connerney1987
 - *Neptune*  : @Connerney1991
 - *Ganymede* : @Kivelson2002


## Jupyter frontend

We also provide a Jupyter notebook that provides interactive access for visualizing planetary magnetic fields at various depths as well as Lowes spectra.

# Documentation

The software has been documented using Sphinx (<https://www.sphinx-doc.org/>) and the documentation is available here: <https://ankitbarik.github.io/planetMagFields/>.


# References


